I'm going to talk about fully
distributed applications and how we're
building platforms towards them at
protocol apps and I'll give a bit of
context about protocol absum just to
give you a sense of how we work how we
go about problem-solving and the kind of
stack that we're building and the models
for it so it's it's a lot it's like
think of it like a introduction where
each paragraph like starts pretty broad
but we condense down so we're in this
amazing period of history where we're
wiring up all of the planet and
connecting ourselves and building this
amazing nervous system and building a
computing platform and application
platform that anybody can use in the
properties of the Internet and the
properties of of the underlying
substrate for these applications have
are now having far-reaching implications
into human lives so the security and
privacy of the application data or the
reliability of whether or not the
application can work is not only meaning
whether or not can people work that day
now it can be in many situations life or
death
so and as we saw in recent elective the
last second and a half now very
important movements are starting to rely
on these applications sometimes relying
on social networks like Twitter and
Facebook and so on to you know we saw
the spring of revolutions in in the
Middle East as one example of the
reliance placed upon these systems so
they better work well right they better
work well in case of certain kinds of
problems or disasters where the internet
might be split or you know and you have
to you know you can't reach the backbone
or they need to work well in situations
where there might be huge attackers or
trying to collect all of the this
information and use it against you in
some way so there's a whole bunch of
different kinds of problems and we tend
to decompose problems and think about
starting projects to to address some of
those problems and over time we tend to
refactor projects and say oh well this
thing is actually quite big and maybe we
can decompose some subset so we started
with the ipfs project and that ended up
yielding a number of other projects
along the way and we recurse so I think
the you know these are the kinds of
things that we we end up thinking about
I'm not gonna go into detail I think
everybody here is pretty familiar with
these just to give you a sense so a bit
about protocol labs just to kind of set
the answer I guess some questions we
tend to think of ourselves in this like
stellar nursery model of saying let's
think about the problems and the
potential solutions in one space and
then kind of construct a project that
could solve it and then think about
growing it over time and building a
community around it and so this is why
you we end up with a number of different
things that have their own identity in
their own communities and so on and
protocol apps as an organization is
built around the idea of this pipeline
of going from ideas all the way to human
superpowers so we again live in an
amazing time where we can go from
conceiving of things and doing doing
research into and moving that research
into development and moving that
development into some into deployment
into people's hands and give people a
human superpower and in the lot in the
20th century that would involve hardware
and that was expensive and hard now with
software and application platforms like
the web we can make this extremely fast
so again somebody can sit at a computer
program an application and then grant a
superpower to other humans now the
problem though is what are the
reliability guarantees of that
superpower is that so we're actually
going to work in light of a whole bunch
of potentially problematic conditions
and so what's happening now is humans
are starting to rely on a lot of these
things often without understanding when
they might break so we should build
robust foundations and good primitives
so that application builders can build
really good software
and this point is not linear of course
it really kind of goes all over the
place sometimes we started with
something that exists and think about
how can it be improved sometimes we
think of new ideas and kind of set them
through sometimes we take ideas that
already exists that other people came up
with and say oh wow this is awesome why
hasn't it been built let's think about
building it I love another thing to
mention about this biplane is that in
these stages there exists a number of
harsh filters that have nothing to do
with the idea itself or the viability of
the idea and are mostly about just
humans and and building things and what
humans are good at so sometimes you know
a lot of great labs produce a number of
of ideas that based on how academia
works today they get produced but it's
really hard to then get them to actually
exist in the real world it's
applications and moving in translating
in this pipeline might take decades in
some cases so you can look at IP FS as
an example of this where the vast
majority the ideas that went into ipfs
have been conceived of probably 10-15
years prior and it just took a while for
the that to become possible to actually
build or actually what's possible it's
just people hadn't done it yet we work
openly and we work with a lot of people
around the globe so this is a shot of a
subset of our contributors on github and
we try and do yeah we try to do as much
as we can through github and that
involves both research in some cases a
lot of development to cross you know
hundreds of repositories and so on kind
of looking at it a bit by the numbers we
have two large ecosystems forming one
around ipfs another around file coin and
twelve large projects over 500 github
repos 500 reasonable model modules we
really value this so we try as much as
possible to whenever we implement
something to refactor things out so that
others could use the intermediate pieces
sometimes maybe to a fault but but we
try very hard to
making the components we make just
improve other things even if we end up
not relying on them later we have a lot
of contributors and all of what we do
would not be possible without our huge
community so yeah in terms of research
we I mean this is kind of a hard thing
to measure but you know we a basic
accounting of just like the notes that
we've collected about about a number of
ideas some big some small is in the
hundreds we're starting to structure
kind of more formal and and some quasi
formal collaborations we have eight
researchers eight plus researchers
either in full-time or part-time
capacity and we are starting to publish
proper papers we're starting with a
series of technical reports and we're
now going to move towards actually
publishing papers and conferences and we
have three open RFPs we're you're going
to hear about that from Evan and so we
we have structured now a proper research
lab and you know Evan will tell you all
about the details of that so I wanted to
briefly mention that with all of these
projects there's extensive documentation
on the web you can find out about each
of them there's a bunch of talks talking
about the projects so this introduction
is like very very short and tailored to
the problems that we have here today
and thinking about Sierra T's and
thinking about the distributed model in
which we want to operate all right let's
shift gears to the good stuff
so the protocols and the models and so
on this is the stack that we're thinking
about we start with a kind of promise
around future proofing and upgrade
ability we want all our protocols to not
fail because maybe people move to use a
different transfer protocol sometimes
that happens and that's a shame or you
know hash function you you choose a hash
function and you bake it into everything
you do and suddenly the cost of moving
from watch hash function to another
becomes extremely difficult
we also don't want to be victims of the
fragmentation in the in the network
stack we want to bind all of the network
together and so we built a system and
library for for doing that and I'll
explain this a bit more we have a way to
model authenticated data structures
where we kind of treat all data as
potentially authenticated data
structures and we have a way of
translating between different systems so
I'll explain a bit more of how that
works but this is kind of a refactoring
of the heart of ipfs and and treating
all data available that can hash link as
the same kind of data structure I
profess is the much more much more
concrete thing here it's a project for
distributing files and building fully
distributed applications that can work
offline or in a disconnected environment
and I'll walk a bit through an example
of that that's where we are and then
Farpoint is a project around
incentivizing a huge network around the
planet to form to build a a properly
decentralized storage market that that
is not controlled by any one party so
this almost to be focusing on these
three primarily here is where sierra de
Thailand exists but it would be then
available and usable by all the
applications about above so the the
observation of IP LD is that when you
look at data structures like git or plan
nines file system or BitTorrent or
Bitcoin or aetherium or all these things
there Merkle trees there are data
structures that use hash linking to
address each other and if there are a
whole bunch of Merkle trees why can't we
bring them together in some huge merkel
forest right and be able to address from
one to the other and be able to move
through them similar to how you can
mount different kind of file systems in
your in your OS or in the web how you
can access a bunch of different URLs
whether or not they're hosted in the
same provider or
the same databases and so on so it's a
that was kind of the basic idea and that
you know turn into a huge rabbit hole
thinking about computation and execution
and models and a whole bunch of stuff
but the basic idea is thinking of
primitives for enabling software
developers both at the platform or
application level to build things that
can take advantage of all the nice
things about authenticating data
structures and make it work well and
play well with everything else so this
leads to a distributed programming
environment so think of things like
bloom I think of things like like a
distributed closure maybe Erlang and so
on so this is that kind of model that
this is pushing towards so at a basic
level it's a serious of formats that can
help you bind all these data structures
together but at a much deeper level it's
it's a thinking of a programming system
that doesn't start with the IDE and the
runtime in one process but thinks about
the runtime across all machines and the
planet whether or not they're connected
there's a lot embedded in that so I'm
not gonna dive into detail but happy to
discuss with people if they're
interested in that what let p2p is so
I'm gonna jump down the stack for a
moment is a a project that just tries to
abstract away the network in a in as
efficient and convenient way as we can
make it but that preserves the
flexibility of the underlying network so
today the web does not really work over
things like Bluetooth you you have to
try really hard to get that to work most
browsers and servers and so on wouldn't
work over that kind of transport and if
you want to try to use something safer
like tor you you also have to go at
great lengths to either enable your use
as a proxy or set up your own hidden
service and so on it's quite difficult
also the reliance on TCP as a single
Transport made it extremely difficult
for other transports like SCTP and DCP
and hold on to others how much of
you know acronym soup - it prevented all
of those protocols from ever bringing
their benefits to applications and the
observation was well hey look the
end-to-end principle was broken what if
we try and fix it by creating a network
stack that lives in the application
layer but could be moved down but you
know application first that abstracts
away all of that and enables
applications to just run with opaque
network addresses and identifiers and as
long as you one application can connect
to any other node and can find a route
through whatever transport said it has
then that should work you shouldn't have
to as an application developer rewrite
your application to make it work over
Bluetooth that should just work
transparently so that's in a nutshell
what what a lipid EP is about but one of
the important things here is it does not
rely on any any kind of existing network
infrastructure or centralized network
infrastructure to the point where you
could split the network in half or in
whatever pieces and the nodes that can
still connect to each other should be
able to continue operating just fine you
could be completely offline on your own
or connect with the rest so this is the
part of our stack that deals with all of
the peer-to-peer magic that you need in
order to make this work
in today's pretty pretty crazy
networking environment with tons of
different kinds of protocols and so on
so this is a toolkit that solves a whole
bunch of problems to enable that to
happen and so you have things like peer
routing and connection setup and natura
versal and a whole bunch of different
kinds of encryption channels and so on
just to make this possible but the idea
is that out of this you think all of
those all that hard work into this layer
and out of that you get a really nice
environment for applications where all
you have to do is have an identifier for
another another peer which is their
their ID and you have a routing system
that can find addresses for that ID and
then you can set up an encrypted channel
between them and then start operating
and again that is not really even bound
to IP you could have this work running
on any kind of network
the other thing I'll mention is IP if I
said the think of this as an application
platform that combines this nice the PDP
networking thing with the authenticated
data structures world and says let's
just build the file system on top of
that and expose it to the web and so now
be able to to look at files and nap and
web apps and so on directly through the
browser as the main viewing point and
you're able to access all kinds of of
things in this authenticated data
structure model where it doesn't matter
where you're getting it from you could
be getting it from a node in your local
machine you could be getting it from a
node elsewhere or whatever and it's all
the same content you can execute it the
same same way we can we have demos with
this kind of stuff later we can we can
show you so I wanted to just talk a bit
about three applications to give you a
sense of where CRT T's come in I guess a
teaser is this right so if we want
applications to work in this environment
where they can completely split then and
we want things like chat or
collaborative documents and all this
kind of stuff then we need a model
doesn't rely on a centralized database
in the cloud somewhere we need a model
that allows convergent data structures
to build to build the state the shared
state of this application now of course
in our model we would like to have full
full guarantees despite whether or not
people are connected at all ever that's
kind of hard you get into like really
hard questions around can you allow to
never sync what it'll logs look like
once once they grow and so on so a lot
of interesting questions they're also
access controls we'll talk about that
later today so the first application
I'll mention is pierpan will can show
them on later later today but the idea
is you have a collaborative real-time
editor you can a lot of charity work
work does this but what's cool about
this is that this works entirely over
/ ipfs and lippy dopey and this is a
full I profess note on the browser so
what's going on here is that is that the
first request is is hitting an IP FS
node either in localhost or in a gateway
somewhere and then downloading the
payload which is the application and
then that application runs and ipfs node
in the tab then uses the p2p to connect
to the other tab and then how you start
exchanging the the CRTC log and so this
is you know an example of an application
that's not really in any domain anywhere
like this this is could be loaded from
our local ipfs node and it works the
same so it demonstrates the use case and
so here we're already thinking about how
do you deal with access controls how do
you deal with sharing documents so right
now it has a capability model this is
fully encrypted and if you share the URL
you are sharing and capability and
you're allowing other people to write to
it and so on but there's a whole bunch
of interesting questions that come when
you want to revoke access and and so on
so yeah showing the URLs there another
example is ipfs cluster where right now
this relies on consensus but it's an
interesting question as to whether or
not this could be a C or D T ipfs
cluster is a tool that brings together a
number of ipfs nodes that want to pool
their storage to replicate the same you
know huge data set for you know
reliability and so on we're also being
able to address more than would fit in a
single computer and transparently makes
these nodes behave as a single ipfs node
so this is kind of a recursive
construction where these four nodes
would then also expose the same ipfs api
and you could still make the same kinds
of requests and they get it just gets
replicated to to the rest of the nodes
and you have a traditional consensus
model here where you know things get
fully committed into a log and then
externalized it to the user but there's
an interesting question as to whether or
not this could actually be a CR dt
there's no real hard requirement that it
needs to be to be consensus there could
be a model here
that were a certainty might be a better
fit this is about like just tracking pin
SATs pin sets it's just an identifier
pointing to a subgraph of a huge tree
that we want to back up yeah this is
kind of showing the recursive
construction there's clusters a tool
that sits next to an IP FS know it and
can point to an API and then works with
the other nodes to the Ducks to the rest
of the world and I guess the last
example is chat so I think the last
example is you know you'd be great to be
able to have a chat application that
just works in a completely distributed
environment where we in this room could
continue talking whether or not the we
can connect to the rest of the world and
we could have you know channels and so
on there's a whole bunch of hard ux
questions that appear when you can when
you're talking in the same channel as a
lot of people in the world and you're
split with a sub group and then you
merge back a whole bunch of other
changes from the rest of the world and
how do you display that to the user so a
whole bunch of interesting challenges
but even before we can get there there's
hard challenges on things like
revocation and so on in large groups
like long-lived
large groups that may or may not be be
talking to each other for that for that
duration now there's a whole bunch of
other kinds of applications as people
are building with ipfs well that gives
you a flavor of a few and we can
probably talk about a lot more thank you
that's it for me
[Applause]